Add OAuth 2.0 authorization code and refresh token grant types (#2150)
matrix-org/matrix-spec: content/client-server-api/_index.md

metadata:
- `authorization_endpoint`
- `response_types_supported`
- `response_mode_supported`

To use this grant, homeservers and clients MUST:
- support the authorization code grant as per [RFC 6749 section 4.1](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-4.1)
- support the [refresh token grant](#refresh-token-grant)
- support PKCE using the `S256` code challenge method as per [RFC 7636](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7636)
- use pre-registered, strict redirect URIs
- use the `fragment` response mode as per [OAuth 2.0 Multiple Response Type
  Encoding Practices](https://openid.net/specs/oauth-v2-multiple-response-types-1_0.html)
  for clients with an HTTPS redirect URI

###### Login flow with the authorization code grant

Logging in with the OAuth 2.0 authorization code grant in the context of the
Matrix specification means to request a scope including full client-server API
read/write access and allocating a device ID.

First, the client needs to generate the following values:

- a random value for the `device_id`
- a random value for the `state`
- a cryptographically random value for the `code_verifier`

**Authorization request**

> It then constructs the authorization request URL using the

Author: Applied.

`authorization_endpoint` value, with the following query parameters:

- The `response_type` value set to `code`
- The `client_id` value obtained by registering the client metadata with the

>   server

Author: I used a table (and in a couple of other places too).

- The `redirect_uri` value that MUST match one of the values registered in the
  client metadata
- The `scope` value set to `urn:matrix:client:api:* urn:matrix:client:device:<device_id>` with the `device_id` generated previously
- The `state` value
- The `response_mode` value
- The `code_challenge` computed from the `code_verifier` value using the SHA-256
  algorithm, as described in [RFC 7636](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7636)
- The `code_challenge_method` set to `S256`

This authorization request URL must be opened in the user's browser:

- For web-based clients, this can be done through a redirection or by opening

>   the URL in a new tab

Author: Applied.

    on iOS or [Android Custom Tabs](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/android/custom-tabs)
    on Android

Sample authorization request, with extra whitespaces for readability:

```
https://account.example.com/oauth2/auth?
    client_id     = s6BhdRkqt3 &
    response_type = code &
    response_mode = fragment &
    redirect_uri  = https://app.example.com/oauth2-callback &
    scope         = urn:matrix:client:api:* urn:matrix:client:device:AAABBBCCCDDD &
    state         = ewubooN9weezeewah9fol4oothohroh3 &
    code_challenge        = 72xySjpngTcCxgbPfFmkPHjMvVDl2jW1aWP7-J6rmwU &
    code_challenge_method = S256
```

**Callback**

Once completed, the user is redirected to the `redirect_uri`, with either a
successful or failed authorization in the URL fragment or query parameters.
Whether the parameters are in the URL fragment or query parameters is determined
by the `response_mode` value:

- if set to `fragment`, the parameters will be placed in the URL fragment, like
  `https://example.com/callback#param1=value1&param2=value2`
- if set to `query`, the parameters will be in placed the query string, like

>   `com.example.app:/callback?param1=value1&param2=value2`

Author: Applied.

To avoid disclosing the parameters to the web server hosting the `redirect_uri`,

> clients should use the `fragment` response mode if the `redirect_uri` is an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
clients SHOULD use the `fragment` response mode if the `redirect_uri` is an
```

Author: Applied.

HTTPS URI with a remote host.

In both success and failure cases, the parameters will have the `state` value
used in the authorization request.

A successful authorization will have a `code` value, for example:

```
https://app.example.com/oauth2-callback#state=ewubooN9weezeewah9fol4oothohroh3&code=iuB7Eiz9heengah1joh2ioy9ahChuP6R
```

A failed authorization will have the following values:

- `error`: the error code
- `error_description`: the error description (optional)
- `error_uri`: the URI where the user can find more information about the error (optional)

For example:

```
https://app.example.com/oauth2-callback#state=ewubooN9weezeewah9fol4oothohroh3&error=access_denied&error_description=The+resource+owner+or+authorization+server+denied+the+request.&error_uri=https%3A%2F%2Ferrors.example.com%2F
```

**Token request**

The client then exchanges the authorization code to obtain an access token using
the token endpoint.

This is done by making a POST request to the `token_endpoint` with the following
parameters, encoded as `application/x-www-form-urlencoded` in the body:

> - The `grant_type` set to `authorization_code`
> - The `code` obtained from the callback

Reviewer: Again, let's make this more explicit:

```suggestion
- `grant_type`: `authorization_code`.
- `code`: the value of `code` obtained from the callback.
```

Author: Applied.

endpoint to get the user ID that owns the access token.

###### User registration

Clients can signal to the server that the user desires to register a new account
by initiating the authorization code grant with the `prompt=create` parameter
set in the authorization request as defined in [Initiating User Registration via
OpenID Connect 1.0](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-prompt-create-1_0.html).

Whether the homeserver supports this parameter is advertised by the
`prompt_values_supported` authorization server metadata.

Servers that support this parameter SHOULD show the account registration UI in
the browser.

##### Refresh token grant

As per [RFC 6749 section 6](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-6),
the refresh token grant lets the client exchange a refresh token for an access
token.

When authorization is granted to a client, the homeserver MUST issue a refresh
token to the client in addition to the access token.

The access token MUST be short-lived and SHOULD be refreshed using the
`refresh_token` when expired.

The homeserver SHOULD issue a new refresh token each time one is used, and

> invalidate the old one. It should do this only if it can guarantee that in case
> a response with a new refresh token is not received and stored by the client,
> retrying the request with the old refresh token will succeed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
invalidate the old one. However, it MUST ensure that the client is able to
retry the refresh request in the case that the response to the request is lost.
```

Author: Applied.

The homeserver SHOULD consider that the session is compromised if an old,

> invalidated refresh token is being used, and SHOULD revoke the session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
invalidated refresh token is used, and SHOULD revoke the session.
```

Author: Applied.

the browser.

##### Refresh token grant

As per [RFC 6749 section 6](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-6),
the refresh token grant lets the client exchange a refresh token for an access
token.

When authorization is granted to a client, the homeserver MUST issue a refresh
token to the client in addition to the access token.

The access token MUST be short-lived and SHOULD be refreshed using the
`refresh_token` when expired.

The homeserver SHOULD issue a new refresh token each time an old one is used,
and invalidate the old one. However, it MUST ensure that the client is able to
retry the refresh request in the case that the response to the request is lost.

The homeserver SHOULD consider that the session is compromised if an old,
invalidated refresh token is used, and SHOULD revoke the session.

The client MUST handle access token refresh failures as follows:

 - If the refresh fails due to network issues or a `5xx` HTTP status code from
   the server, the client should retry the request with the old refresh token
   later.
 - If the refresh fails due to a `4xx` HTTP status code from the server, the
   client should consider the session logged out.

> #### Login flow

Reviewer: I feel like it might be more approachable if we put this (and 'Token refresh flow') at the *start* of the "OAuth2.0 API" section (i.e., before we go into the details of metadata, scopes, grants, etc).  WDYT?

Author: Sure, done.

Logging in with the OAuth 2.0 API should be done with the [authorization code
grant](#authorization-code-grant). In the context of the Matrix specification,
this means requesting a [scope](#scope) including full client-server API
read/write access and allocating a device ID.

> First, the client needs to generate the following values:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the client has retrieved the [server metadata](#server-metadata-discovery), it client needs to generate the following values:
```

Author: Applied.

- `device_id`: a unique identifier for this device; see the

>   [`urn:matrix:client:device:<device_id>`] scope.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  [`urn:matrix:client:device:<device_id>`](#device-id-allocation) scope.
```

Author: Applied.

  It is defined in [RFC 7636](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7636) as
  a high-entropy cryptographic random string using the characters `[A-Z]`,
  `[a-z]`, `[0-9]`, `-`, `.`, `_` and `~` with a minimum length of 43 characters
  and a maximum length of 128 characters.

**Authorization request**

The client then constructs the authorization request URL using the
`authorization_endpoint` value, with the following query parameters:

| Parameter               | Value                                              |
|-------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|
| `response_type`         | `code`                                             |
| `client_id`             | The client ID returned from client registration.   |
| `redirect_uri`          | The redirect URI that MUST match one of the values registered in the client metadata |
| `scope`                 | `urn:matrix:client:api:* urn:matrix:client:device:<device_id>` with the `device_id` generated previously. |
| `state`                 | The `state` value generated previously.            |
| `response_mode`         | `fragment` or `query` (see "[Callback](#callback)" below). |

> | `code_challenge`        | Computed from the `code_verifier` value generated previously using the SHA-256 algorithm, as described in [RFC 7636](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7636) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `code_challenge`        | Computed from the `code_verifier` value generated previously using the SHA-256 algorithm, as described in [RFC 7636](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7636). |
```
